Allow running ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters in parallel (#93)
strimzi/proposals: 057-run-zk-kraft-clusters-parallel.md

# Allow running ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters in parallel

This proposal is about changing the way the current `UseKRaft` feature gate works.
It changes the way the Strimzi Cluster Operator handles ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters when it is enabled.

## Current situation

Currently, when the `UseKRaft` feature gate is enabled (together with the required `KafkaNodePools` one), the operator expects all the already running Apache Kafka clusters being KRaft-based.
It means that the `Kafka` custom resources are configured together with `KafkaNodePool`(s) with `broker` and `controller` roles.
There is no way to differentiate between clusters running in ZooKeeper or KRaft mode.
When a `Kafka` custom resource is configured to actually use ZooKeeper or it's just badly configured but supposed to be KRaft based, the operator detects it as having a missing KRaft controllers configuration and logs the following warning:

```shell

> io.strimzi.operator.common.model.InvalidResourceException: Tha Kafka cluster my-cluster is invalid: [At least one KafkaNodePool with the controller role and at least one replica is required when KRaft mode is enabled]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
io.strimzi.operator.common.model.InvalidResourceException: The Kafka cluster my-cluster is invalid: [At least one KafkaNodePool with the controller role and at least one replica is required when KRaft mode is enabled]
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe you should open a PR to fix it in the code instead? 😮

Author: Yeah, I will update here and open the PR on code.

Author: PR is here https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator/pull/9149

## Motivation

Leaving a ZooKeeper-based cluster not operated when the `UseKRaft` feature gate is enabled looks like a bad thing for the user, until the ZooKeeper support will be completely removed.
Before that, the user should be able to have both ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters running and operated when the `UseKRaft` feature gate is enabled.
Also, taking into account the future ZooKeeper to KRaft migration process, as described in the proposal [PR#90](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/90), it would help the operator migration component to detect which cluster is ZooKeeper-based so "migrate-able" and which one is already KRaft-based.

## Proposal

The proposal is about adding a new `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource, to be applied by the user, in order to identify a ZooKeeper or KRaft based cluster.
The possible values would be:

* `disabled`, missing or any invalid value: identifies a ZooKeeper-based cluster.
* `enabled`: identifies a KRaft-based cluster.

This way, during the reconciliation, the operator is able to "detect" a ZooKeeper-based cluster avoiding the warning and allowing the user to operate it.

> On the KRaft side, the annotation would be needed to have the operator reconciling the corresponding `Kafka` custom resource.

Reviewer 3: Maybe consider adding a table, to make the behaviour clear with fewer words?

| Operator feature gate | CR Annotation | Operator behaviour |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `-UseKraft` | `enabled` | ??log a warning??|
| `-UseKraft` | anything else | ZK reconciliation | 
| `+UseKraft` | `enabled` | KRaft reconciliation |
| `+UseKraft` | anything else |ZK reconciliation |

Author: I can add the table if you like but regarding the first use case `-UseKRaft` with `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation, I made a comparison with what happens today with node pools (this proposal is aiming to do almost the same but for KRaft feature gate). When we have `-KafkaNodePools` (so no node pools feature gate enabled) but `strimzi.io/node-pools: enabled` on the Kafka CR (deployed together with some `KafkaNodePool`(s)), the operator just ignores that annotation (and node pools) and deploys the Kafka cluster just following the `spec.kafka` and `spec.zookeeper`. No warning printed, it's just ignored, which sounds fine to me imho. @scholzj what are your thoughts on this?

Reviewer 2: I would probably just ignore it when the feature gate is disabled. But not a strong opinion on this one.

Without the annotation, but the `UseKRaft` feature gate enabled, the operator would try to handle it as a ZooKeeper-based one.
The `UseKRaft` feature gate does currently not support any upgrades of KRaft clusters.

> It is expected to be used only for short-lives clusters used for development and testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is expected to be used only for short-lived clusters used for development and testing.
```

So no clusters are expected to exist.
Therefore adding the annotation now does not present any backwards compatibility issues.

> Only ZooKeeper-based clusters are expected and newly created KRaft-based clusters having the `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled`.

Reviewer: One point with a consistency somewhere you use KRaft-based and somewhere Kraft based. I would stick with KRaft-based everywhere. But it's just a nit ).

Author: You are right but when it's just one I use "ZooKeeper-based cluster and KRaft-based cluster", when I want to mention both using plural I say "...ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters...". Not sure if and where I should put `-based` because `based` is referring to both.

## Affected/not affected projects

The Strimzi Cluster Operator is the only project affected by this proposal.
Its logic needs to be updated in order to be able to handle the new `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation (or the missing of it).
No other projects in the Strimzi ecosystem are impacted by this proposal.

## Compatibility

If the user is running the operator with `UseKRaft` feature gate enabled, it will detect ZooKeeper-based cluster allowing to operate them again.
If the user has a KRaft-based cluster deployed, because of the missing annotation, the operator will try to handle it as it was ZooKeeper-based which would fail.
In this case, if the user applies `strimzi.io/kraft: enabled` annotation on it, there could be unexpected results on the reconciliation. So doing this is not supported.
In general, when this proposal is in place, the expectation is that there won't be KRaft-based clusters already running but there could be only ZooKeeper-based clusters running.
Breaking this backward compatibility is expected by taking into account that the KRaft support in Strimzi is still behind a feature gate and should be considered just for development purposes. 

> 

Reviewer 3: I'd like to see mention of what happens to this annotation when

* KRaft is the only thing Kafka supports.
* An existing KRaft cluster has its annotation changed to `disabled`. 

The problem I see with it being a (user managed) annotation is that while that's fine for the user to express their intent, it cannot also be used by the operator to express how it interprets the resource.

Author: > I'd like to see mention of what happens to this annotation when ...

I would expect the annotation handling just removed from the operator and the annotation ignored. It's going to happen the same way for the `node-pools` annotation as stated in the corresponding proposal: "So once the ZooKeeper support is removed from Strimzi, we will also remove the support for the virtual node pool and the strimzi.io/node-pools annotation" ... details [here](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/blob/main/050-Kafka-Node-Pools.md).

> it cannot also be used by the operator to express how it interprets the resource.

I am not sure what do you mean by this.

# Allow running ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters in parallel

This proposal is about changing the way the current `UseKRaft` feature gate works.
It changes the way the Strimzi Cluster Operator handles ZooKeeper and KRaft based clusters when it is enabled.

## Current situation

> Currently, when the `UseKRaft` feature gate is enabled (together with the required `KafkaNodePools` one), the operator expects all the already running Apache Kafka clusters being KRaft-based.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Currently, when the `UseKRaft` feature gate is enabled (together with the required `KafkaNodePools` one), the operator expects the Apache Kafka clusters already running to be KRaft-based.
```

Also, taking into account the future ZooKeeper to KRaft migration process, as described in the proposal [PR#90](https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/90), it would help the operator migration component to detect which cluster is ZooKeeper-based so "migrate-able" and which one is already KRaft-based.

## Proposal

The proposal is about adding a new `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation to the `Kafka` custom resource, to be applied by the user, in order to identify a ZooKeeper or KRaft based cluster.
The possible values would be:

* `disabled`, missing or any invalid value: identifies a ZooKeeper-based cluster.
* `enabled`: identifies a KRaft-based cluster.

This way, during the reconciliation, the operator is able to "detect" a ZooKeeper-based cluster avoiding the warning and allowing the user to operate it.
On the KRaft side, the annotation would be needed to have the operator reconciling the corresponding `Kafka` custom resource.
Without the annotation, but the `UseKRaft` feature gate enabled, the operator would try to handle it as a ZooKeeper-based one.

> | Operator Feature Gate | `strimzi.io/kraft` annotation | Operator behaviour       |

Reviewer 4: would it help to have a column for KafkaNodePools settings too?

Author: KafkaNodePools feature gate is mandatory for using KRaft so it's implicit that it should be always enabled. Having it disabled doesn't make any KRaft feature gate value working. So I am not sure it makes sense to add a column for that.

|-----------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------|
| `-UseKRaft`           | `enabled`                     | Ignore annotation        |
| `-UseKRaft`           | missing or anything else      | ZooKeeper reconciliation |
| `+UseKRaft`           | `enabled`                     | KRaft reconciliation     |
| `+UseKRaft`           | missing or anything else      | ZooKeeper reconciliation |

> The `UseKRaft` feature gate does currently not support any upgrades of KRaft clusters.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `UseKRaft` feature gate does not currently support any upgrades of KRaft clusters.
```
